we know the couples have lived together
before the marriage actually increases
the probability that the relationship
will fail and the reason for that is
very straightforward and talking of
things that risk harming relationships
subject we've never spoke about before
is oh yeah and that's a huge reason sex
has disappeared people need to stop
doing that Jordan Peterson the
psychology Professor people love or love
to hate he's undeniably one of the
greatest intellectual phenomenons on the
planet and many view him as the ultimate
Father Figure welcome back Mr Peterson
we're built for maximal Challenge and
that isn't the way we view ourselves in
the modern world we view ourselves as
built for consumption and pleasure for
example watching pornography but what
are the downstream consequences of that
well first of all it's easy to get what
sexual gratification but does it matter
oh it's a catastrophe you're not
desperate anymore and if you're going to
have the true adventure of your life
you're going to need love shame guilt
desperation and pain like it's hard but
now people take the easy Road like
avoiding Conflict for example and I
spent a lot of time studying evil it
arises when good men hold their tongue
now you may suffer some consequences of
speaking but retreating one step at a
time defensively that it makes you sick
of yourself there's nothing worse that
can happen to you you want your life to
be unbearably entertaining and maybe all
the sorrow and catastrophe has to be
part of it because otherwise
there's there's nothing about it that's
glorious this has always blown my mind a
little bit 53% of you that listen to the
show regularly haven't yet subscribed to
the show so could I ask you for a favor
before we start if you like the show and
you like what we do here and you want to
support us the free simple way that you
can do just that is by hitting the
Subscribe button and my commitment to
you is if you do that then I'll do
everything in my power me and my team to
make sure that this show is better for
you every single week we'll listen to
your feedback we'll find the guests that
you want me to speak to and we'll
continue to do what we do thank you so
much your book comes at a really
interesting time in my life personally
your book is called we who wrestle with
God and it's my belief and suspicion
that there's a lot of people wrestling
with God at the moment and when I say
the word God I don't necessarily mean
some man in the sky with a beard what I
really mean is a greater meaning a
greater sense of meaning um the world
feels like and you speak to this in the
book that it's gotten more and more
individualistic and there's consequence
to that fractionated is another way of
thinking about it right because you can
think about it as individualistic and
that's a positive spin so to speak but
alienated isolated and fractionated is
the what would you say is the
accompaniment to that see I think I
think I think the case is is that the
liberal
experiment in individualism only works
when the conservative Foundation is in
place right if you aggregate people
together and they share enough
fundamental values especially of a
particular sort then you can concentrate
on the individual and individual freedom
but there's a lot of preconditions for
that and you know the Scottish liberals
so the ones who really established
Western liberalism as a philosophical
and political movement they knew that
you know it
was individual
liberty judeo-christian substructure and
that was an assumption now the problem
with modern liberalism is that that
underlying Foundation has become
extremely shaky and everyone feels it
that's what the culture wars about
fundamentally and that fact is
invalidating the fractionated liberal
experiment partly see it's partly
because we have the wrong conception of
identity fundamentally identity is a
hierarchical structure
so we kind of think that you end at your
boundaries as an IND individual but you
don't
because well you're probably not not
going to want to be alone so then let's
say you're married okay so
now your identity as a husband that's a
social identity and then you're you have
an identity as a father that's a social
identity then you have an identity as a
member of your community and a member of
your city and a member of your state and
a member of your nation and
then you're involved in a metaphysical
Endeavor that constitutes the foundation
for the nation let's say that's would be
one nation under God that's one way of
thinking about it or you could think
about it as the self-evident truths that
underly the state your identity exists
at all those levels and then your mental
health isn't something you carry around
in your head it's the harmony that
exists or doesn't exist between all
those levels and that isn't how liberal
individualists think about identity at
all and that's because they were for a
long time fortunate enough so all those
other strata were in place so where do
we find ourselves now if we don't have
that hierarchy and we aren't held in
place by all those layers and sort of
Social and I guess family
identities a drift in a storm
alone so look here's here's an
interesting fact
so Psych ologists who are statistically
minded they're called psychometricians
they're psychologists who are obsessed
research psychologists who are obsessed
with measurement and concept
definition spent a lot of time
aggregating Concepts these were in some
ways what they were doing was equivalent
to the development of early large
language models so psychologists were at
the Forefront of
that on the statistical side
words that we use to describe people
Clump
together so for example if you're
extroverted you're social and you're
happy you're
enthusiastic okay so those Clump
together if
you're anxious you're also you also tend
to be frustrated disappointed grief
stricken and in pain all the negative
emotions
Clump words associated with your empathy
aggregate words associated with your
dutifulness Aggregate and so do words
associated with creativity those are the
five fundamental dimensions of
temperament one of the words that clumps
with negative emotion is
self-consciousness which means that
self-consciousness is so tightly
associated with suffering that they're
not conceptually
distinguishable which means literally
the more you think about yourself the
more miserable you
are and it it it makes sense when you
understand how social people are we're
so
social that you can take the most
antisocial human beings imaginable so
Psychopathic
criminals and you can punish them by
putting them in solitary confinement
that's how social human beings are and
so your mental health is way more
dependent on your nesting within a
social structure than than on your say
the internal coherence of your belief
systems in fact I think it's hardly at
all dependent on the internal
consistency of your coherence of your
belief systems it's more like does
anyone like you do you have any friends
do you have anyone that loves you or
more or maybe even more profoundly are
there people for whom you make
sacrifices right that's a very that's
it's relevant to the topic of this book
obviously because the relationship with
the Divine in the stories that I'm
detailing in this book most of them are
Old Testament Stories the relationship
with the Divine is a sacrificial
relationship the Divine is that to which
sacrifice is directed well if you get
married it's a
sacrificial offering because you
sacrifice your potential relationship
with all other women to that
woman what does one dra an individual
level if they find themselves in such a
society where individualism has taken
hold um and they can't necessarily
easily change the society are there
daytoday week to week choices that I'm
making that are pushing me away from
that meaning and purpose and sort of uh
Collective I guess sense of
responsibility like the individual
listening to this now that completely
agrees with you finds himself as being a
lonely person and goes what do I do
about this Jordan well one of the things
you do with disagreeable people who are
more inclined by temperament to be
competitive and attain victory for
themselves is one of the exercises you
can do with disagreeable people if
you're a disagreeable extrovert you tend
to be narcissistic and the problem with
that technically is that you alienate
people and the problem with that is
while you're
no doubt learned this more as you become
successful it's like you need a team and
right and the more and the more tightly
knit it is and the more you're all
working in the same direction the better
everything works well you it's not
useful to be a narcissist because maybe
you get what you want right now this
time but as a propagating strategy
across time it's a degenerating game
okay so what do you do well instead of
thinking about what you want or even
thinking about how to strategize in
relationship to your goals you might
think about what you could do to for
other people or you could think about
what you would do if you only did what
was true and right those are very
different orientations right and the
religious orientation fundamentally is
the orientation towards what is true and
right and you might say well I don't
know what's true and right it's like
yeah kind of because our knowledge is
bounded and we're ignorant so do we
understand the nature of the highest
good well no but it's a very rare person
who doesn't know some of the time when
they're doing something
wrong and it's also a non-existent
person who doesn't have some concept of
the good because you can't act without a
concept of the good because you act
towards a goal you deem desirable so
that's up I mean unless you're trying to
make your life worse and people do do
that from time to time but believe that
as an exception I mean you have
to you have to have descended into Hell
in a way before you're in a situation
where you're actively working to make
your own life worse that can happen but
assuming that
you're relatively well embedded in the
realm of the normal then you're moving
towards something better always because
otherwise there's no motivation we we
know this technically this isn't even
disputable
so the positive emotion systems that
make you enthusiastic so that fill you
with the desire to move towards a
goal independent of fear say you know
because you could move towards a safety
goal because you're afraid but imagine
you're trying to accomplish something
you have a goal the positive emotion
systems operate to track progress to the
goal positive emotion is a consequence
of evidence of movement towards the
desired goal okay so now you have a
proximal goal you know like our proximal
goal right now might be just to like in
the most micro level possible might be
to display facial signs of interest in
the conversation right it's very micro
goal but then that's nested in our
desire to have an interest in
conversation on the topic we're having
right now and then inside the podcast as
a whole and then as part of the podcast
Enterprise that you're involved in as
part of the book Enterprise let's say
that I'm involved in that's nested
inside our view of the world right so
you see there there are nestings of the
good that have no upper limit that's
Jacob's Ladder by the way and at the top
of that is the good
itself which is the Divine for all
intents and purposes Divine what do you
mean by that that's a
definition that that's what I mean is
that in the hierarchy of what's
good the Divine is the peak the top okay
right now you don't know what that
is that's also an insistence in the
biblical texts by the way in the final
analysis the Divine is ineffable it's
not
definable and it's beyond you and that's
partly because it's there's a practical
reason for that even you know this as
well as you move towards a goal let's
say you attain a goal okay now you've
accomplished well are you done it's like
no a new potential goal emerges a new
Pinnacle and then maybe you'll
accomplish that but then a new one
exists and so you could say that the the
domain of the the domain of opportunity
is
Limitless right because the thing that's
at the Pinnacle recedes as you approach
it and that's a you could say that's a
technical definition of God which is
accurate that is a technical definition
of God God is the good towards which all
Goods
Point these are definitions again
remember they're not proclamations of
Faith they're definitions so we
obviously all believe that all good
things share something in common because
otherwise we wouldn't have the category
good and then we all believe that there
are rank orders of good because
otherwise everything good would be
equally worth pursuing No One Believes
that so there's a rank order well if
there's a rank orders towards some end
or some Pinnacle you can also think
about it as a
foundation depends on which metaphorical
landscape you want to
inhabit then the question becomes well
how do you characterize that which is
the ultimate aim that which is is and
should be the ultimate aim well the
the stories on which our culture is
predicated characterize that in story do
you think many people have an ultimate
aim in their mind they they do whether
they know it or not how what do you mean
by that so like the average person
listening to this now do they are they
conscious at all of what they're no but
it's implicit okay one of the things the
psychoanalytic thinkers insisted on Carl
Young in particular was that everybody
acts out a
story sometimes it's a tragic story
sometimes it's the story of hell like
you're trapped in a story one way or
another now do you know the Contours of
your
story not necessarily I mean people are
often very bad at describing themselves
they don't know what they're up to that
doesn't mean they're not up to something
and you could also think about them as
the Battleground between Waring stories
that also happens that just means
they're
fractionated in their psyche you know
they're being pulled in many directions
at the same time someone said to me
actually yesterday they said an
interesting way to understand your self
narrative or your self story is to
answer the question if you were a
character a fictional character who
would you be and in that you figure out
whether you have this sort of heroized
story or if you're a victim so I ask you
that question yeah right absolutely
which fictional character would you
be bugs bud
bu Bugs Bunny's a trickster
character right
so yeah more serious
answer do you ever read the idiot
no yeah well I'm probably half idiot and
half rol
nikov that's another way of looking at
it why' you say that
the um character of the idiot in dov's
novel is a holy fool it's a strange
combination a person who's doing things
right in a manner that's I suppose not
obvious that
looks that can easily be confused
with naivity or foolishness
playfulness even I
suppose is that how you characterize
yourself someone that's doing things
right but in a way that others perceive
as foolishness or naivity or or even
malevolence at
times you know I mean that's partly why
people have gone after my
reputation does it does it ever bother
you people going after your reputation
or them P sure I mean sometimes it's
like it's been very distressing very
distressing the battles I've had with
the College of psychologists in Ontario
those are no joke it's very very
stressful and
unconscionable so expensive hundreds of
thousands of dollars years it's been 10
years of legal battles um calumny in the
Press they're they're attempting to
undermine my professional credibility
with some degree of success you know
because when you're professional profal
College goes after
you people have to make a choice it's
either the professional colleg is
corrupt and wrong or the individual
being targeted is corrupt and wrong it's
way easier to draw the second conclusion
and under most circumstances in a valid
State that's the correct
conclusion so and it was very stressful
to find myself embattled at the
university University of Toronto I liked
working there that place had its
problems but it was pretty functional
and and I likeed being there I I I
enjoyed my career as a professor I had
great relationships with the
undergraduates and my graduate students
I love doing my research which has also
disappeared um
so
now those are the
serious disputes that I've had
reputationally let's say um there's a
lot of casual reputation savaging that I
don't really care about from journalists
and so forth although sometimes that's
been pretty brutal because whenever that
happened
especially when things just started to
be developing around me let's say on the
public
stage when it when I encountered a
particularly Psychopathic journalist
which happened quite often particularly
in the UK um it was completely a toss up
which way it was going to go like it
could have just finished me and my
family that that was definitely the case
three or four five times maybe more than
that so yes it's very bothersome now now
and really for a long
time all of that takes place within a
much broader context all the
interactions I have with people in my
actual life are ridiculously positive
and what would you say positive and
gratifying you know so that's a form of
suffering in a way and everybody goes
through suffering and because you've
been through that have you been able to
develop a a strategy or a some kind of
anchoring that helps you when the wind
blows like that well yeah oh definitely
I
mean uh I had very strong
relationships when all of this started
to develop around me and that's just
become more the case a very tightly knit
family and a very tightly knit group of
friends now I lost some more peripheral
friends
but you know that's unfortunate but s so
there's that now is that a strategy um
well it's not exactly a strategy because
I didn't design it towards an end it was
more like an end in itself right I mean
I had kids not as a strategic move but
because I like kids so and I
particularly like my kids so
that's not a strategy and I really have
a great relationship with my wife and
like I've known her for 52 years it's a
very long time and uh she's definitely
my best friend and probably has been for
52 years and so that's really helpful
that that and that refers back to this
issue of identity that we were
discussing you know my identity is well
structured in in the social sense
and then in terms of strategy yeah I
mean I have a meta strategy I suppose I
just say what I
think right now is that a
strategy it depends on how you define
strategy it's not a strategy that's
designed to serve my ends not not in a
individualistic
way so I'm just trying to see what
happens if I say what I think that's a
way of navigating in the world right
it's an adventurous way of navigating in
the world because you don't know what's
going to happen you have to let go of
that and then there's a element of faith
in that right there's faith in
everything you do you know the the
empiricist types the scientific
reductionists they say well you can move
forward in the world without faith
that's complete bloody rubbish there
isn't anything you ever do that's
important that you don't do in light of
Faith it's like if you get married you
do that on the basis of the evidence do
you what bloody evidence do you have
you're 23 years old you don't know a
damn thing you know maybe you're in love
with the person that you want to marry
but you have no evidence whatsoever
about how your life is going to go none
you have to LEAP into the unknown like
you do with everything that's important
that's all Faith predicated now the
question is Faith in what well if you
decide that you're just going to say
what you think
then you have faith in the
truth at least in so far as you have
access to the truth is it true to say
that if you hadn't have said what you
think publicly then you would have
experienced less suffering than you have
no really I don't think so so if you had
said if you had stayed in your practice
you know as a clinicaly because I would
have had to not I would have had to bite
my tongue and you think that's more I
know it it's not a matter of thinking I
know it I know it
uh absolutely 100% I spent a lot of time
studying evil a lot of time and I know
how it arises it arises when good men
hold their tongue you don't want that
there's nothing worse that can happen to
you now you may suffer some consequences
of
speaking for sure but all things
considered which is the right attitude
if you're wise
there's nothing worse that can happen to
you than to falsify your
speech is saying nothing a form of
falsifying spee it is when you have
something to say yeah definitely because
there's a lot of people probably
listening now that have a lot they want
to say yeah but if they say it they're
going to lose their job or they're
there's going to be immediate
consequences which might mean they can't
feed their family yeah it might mean
that but it also might mean that if they
bite their tongue and pretend to be
something other than they are they'll be
a weak model for
children and you know is that better
than having some Financial
instability Maybe here's a counter
proposition if your job requires you to
lie maybe you should find another
job now look I also understand that
there are strategic considerations in
such a decision there's no sense
martyring yourself stupidly and if
you're going
to say what you believe to be the case
then you need to put yourself in a
position where doing so won't be
instantly catastrophic in a way you
can't fix because that's not a good
that's not
wise now when things blew up around me I
had three sources of
income that wasn't
accidental now you know people say well
you are fortunate it's like
yeah and careful mhm so I didn't want
have all my eggs in one basket and that
turned out well I knew that it's like
you have no autonomy if you have all
your eggs in one basket so if you're
going to think strategically if you're
going to think like someone who's at war
let's say then you don't leave your you
don't leave
a mortal flank
exposed and so if you know here's a rule
if you find yourself in a position where
you're unable to speak you haven't
fortified your territory
properly right so then you have to think
about that it's like you think okay why
can't I say what I believe to be the
case where am I
vulnerable and you can say well that's
inevitable it's like no it's not it's
not
inevitable that doesn't mean it isn't
difficult to to fortify and to put
yourself in a position
where you're on the offense successfully
that's hard but retreating One Step at a
Time defensively for your whole life and
shrinking while you do it that's also
not very that's also difficult it's just
the kind of difficult that wears you
down and makes you sick of
yourself that's not a good that's not a
good plan that's a bad
plan and did you see this when you were
in your clinical practice did you see it
in people oh constantly how does it show
up on the surface what are the words
that they say to articulate that this
sort of slow diminishing retraction oh
you see that in people's marriages all
the time when marriages
deteriorate a marriage ends in divorce
when there's 10,000 fights that haven't
been
had and I really I'm I'm not just
guessing at that number it's like let's
say your marriage isn't going very well
and so you have
five
uncomfortable quasi disputes a day mhm
just to pick a number maybe it's 50
maybe it's three whatever five will do
well that's 1500 a year okay now you
just aggregate that
over let's say the 10 years it takes
your marriage to
collapse well you've got something
approximating 10,000 fights you didn't
have that's 10,000 times you remain
silent when you had something to say and
they all Aggregate and then every time
once you've collected the first
5,000 then every time you have a dispute
all 5,000 are lurking behind that
dispute and the fact of their existence
makes it much less likely that you'll
say what you have to say that's the
reemergence of the Dragon of chaos as a
consequence of fleeing from your fate
that's exactly right last time we spoke
you said something which stayed with me
and I've actually forwarded it to a few
of my friends on this particular subject
you said to me you're going to have to
sit and spend 90 minutes a week speaking
to your partner yeah so annoying it's so
annoying it's so annoying but it's so
important and so many of my friends that
are in have relationship difficulties I
send them just a little four minute clip
I have on my phone of you saying that
because the 90 minute no it might be 95
minutes it might be 85 minutes but the
concept of you need to sit down and
create a space where she or he or
whatever can tell you what they've
noticed why they don't like you exactly
yeah yeah yeah well it's especially I
think
I don't think that you can really
establish the kind of relationship with
a woman that you want with anything in
the
road like it's hard for women to give
themselves to men and no wonder it's
amazing they ever do it they have a lot
on the
line what are the preconditions for that
offering
uh peace and
security you can tell if if it's if the
territory is being cleared because play
emerges right right play emerges and
play is a very fragile motivational
state it can be disrupted by almost
anything so if there are impediments to
understanding play will not arise and
then you don't have the romantic
adventure that you want it's
grudging right you don't have a
voluntary partner and that's a very hard
thing to attain right that full
voluntary partnership that means that
you're in sync with each other MH you
can't expect that to be easy you can't
even be in sync with yourself like it's
hard and you need to keep each other up
to date you need to know what's going on
you need to iron out the sources of
discomfort or distrust and that there's
a lot of Dante's Inferno what's that
that well Dante's
Inferno is a characterization of Hell by
by Dante by it's one of the most famous
poems ever written and it's it's you
could think about it as what you have to
do to get to the bottom of things so
let's say that you have a dispute with
your wife and it's a recurring
dispute right it's an issue you have an
issue well do you want to address the
issue it's like do you want want to do
surgery without anesthetic like it's the
same question addressing an issue is a
journey into the
abyss Dante placed Satan at the bottom
of hell right so that's the figure of
malevolence itself encased in ice and
Frozen so immobile surrounded by those
who betray that's the lowest level of
hell why well it's often the case that
if you journey into an issue spiral down
to the bottom you'll find
betrayal right cuz maybe your partner
doesn't trust you because she was
betrayed highly probable highly probable
or her grandmother was betrayed like you
know there's bad blood between men and
women can you have a solve for that so
if I'm in a situation where my partner
doesn't trust me because she was
betrayed whether it's something I did or
whatever how do you ever get rid of the
devil at the bottom of the Spiral well
you have to you have to find out that
it's there okay that's a hard question
you both have to want
to that's the first thing because that's
the setting of the aim what do we
want we want to play Forever in God's
Heavenly Garden how about that that's a
metaphorical representation right but
that's a wall Garden that's the human
environment the walls are the walls of
your house the garden is
nature displaying itself in its beauty
within boundaries that's a place that
play can take place that's what you want
you got to think about it what do you
want okay so now we might ask what do
you mean want okay if you were taking
care of yourself and you could have what
was good for you what would that be now
that's a hard question right you're
going to have to think about that for a
long time what would satisfy something
as someone as miserable and resentful
and useless as me
right if I could have it now people will
they don't even want
to address that issue be because part of
the problem with making your aim clear
is you know when you're failing and
people would rather keep the evidence of
their failure obscured from themselves
even if it meant continued failure but
now let's say you decide not to do that
you're going to think okay I'm going to
aim high I'm going to take care of
myself okay now your wife's on Lord with
that now that's a hell of that's a
that's really what the marital vow is in
the final analysis most deeply is that
willingness to participate in that
game now you have to tell each other the
truth what the hell do you want well she
doesn't know and neither do you not
really so you got to start digging
finding out and you and noticing it's
like now and then you'll see that you're
happy with each other and maybe it'll
happen kind of randomly you'll be out in
some I don't know maybe you're at a
restaurant or you're gone for a walk or
who knows and you'll notice oh this is
going well it's like oh yeah this is
going well what are we doing right could
we take that little episode and could we
start to expand it you know because one
of the things you can do in our marriage
is you can notice when things are going
well and then you can have a chat with
each other and say look I don't know
what we did during this period of time
but let's see if we can figure it out
see if we could do like 10% more of that
next week or one % more and then just
make that expand you can do that too by
you know hypothetically at some point if
you're married at some point you were in
love with your wife you can remember
that you have to remember that you have
to practice remembering that you have to
practice bringing it to mind and
occupying that because when you first
fall in love it kind of happens to you
right that's a gift but you have to in
order for that to last you have
to become an expert at you have to
become an expert at it you have to take
it on as a responsibility it's offered
as a gift but then you have to take it
on as a responsibility then you have to
practice it's like oh yes I love this
person and if you don't at the moment
you have to think well I did and I could
so why don't I is it
me that's probably it's
you might be them too but you might as
well start with you I mean you got lots
of flaws you could start with those what
if you just made a bad decision as in
like the person you picked you think
they're not
compatible well you stand a tough one a
because you're not really compatible
with anyone you know people think well
I'll find the right person it's like
first of all no you won't second if you
found the right person and they ever saw
you they just run away screaming so it's
just the whole conceptual scheme is
wrong I when I was on tour there was one
three-day period where the same question
emerged from the audience because I do a
Q&A three nights in a row how do I find
the person that's right for me and I I
tried answering it and by the third
night I thought oh I know why I can't
answer this question it's because it's a
stupid question it's badly formulated
like profoundly badly formulated fatally
badly formulated it's not the right
question the right question
is how could I learn to offer something
to someone else that would make me
eminently desirable that's a way
different question like it's so they're
not even in the same conceptual universe
and it's the right question because you
can build yourself into a person that
people would line up to be with how
how well have you done
it to some well you told me not you're
very successful right you you're
increasingly successful your book warns
against narcissism Jordan so yeah
there's there's a difference between
narcissism and giving the devil is Du
you've look okay let let's pull back a
little bit what have you done right I
have focused on myself for a long time
and okay what does that mean it means I
fortified myself financially okay so
that I'm I'm you know I can support
others I can support a family so that's
not exactly focusing on yourself right
okay that's focusing on getting your act
together and I'm being very picky about
the words because focus on yourself that
has a
narcissistic connotation but that that
isn't what you're talking about you said
you fortified yourself financially okay
so now you're you you you you have
Foundation under your feet financially
okay okay good what else
I go to the gym so I'm strong physically
strong okay um which is useful um I've
learned a lot okay a lot of learning
about myself about how I show up in the
world right so you're trying to learn
yes I've learned skills so well so
there's three things that are pretty
good yeah you've got a firm Financial
Foundation you've you're work you're
you're maintaining yourself physically
or even improving yourself and you're
doing the same thing say spiritually and
and intellectually okay well that
attract a fair number of people just
those three right and maybe you're
increasing the probability that will
attract the sort of person that you
would like to attract that is very much
the story of my life like I think don't
think people realize this but I've
actually been on I think four dates in
my entire life I'm 32 and I took this
really counter sort of seems
counterintuitive approach to myself
which was as an 18-year-old I basically
couldn't attract anybody I was also not
on dating apps I wasn't doing so my for
10 years I basically focused on myself
and you know 27 years old someone
messaged me and I went on it and this is
how I am like if I'm going to go on a
date it's going to be I'm going to go
all in it was a three-day date that I
planned in an Excel document I've been
with that person for six years so I feel
like I didn't date I didn't go to bars
and try and like you know that's worth
taking apart I'm I like I like to do
arithmetic with my clients like people
hate arithmetic and it's no wonder
because it's so sad aage so I'll give
you an example so 15 years
ago I counted the number of times I
would see my
parents it's like 20 times so then I
knew
that right 20 isn't very
many right how many people do you get to
try on in your
life five if you're lucky if you're
attractive and fortunate you get five
cracks at the p
five isn't very many and people think
well it's a there's plenty of fish in
the sea it's like that doesn't mean
they're going to swarm around you buddy
right it's and maybe it's even worse for
women because their time frame is is
very short you know like if a woman
isn't in a
relationship family relationship by 30
then it's starting to get pretty damn
rough and that's almost independent of
how attractive she is it's like you
don't have much time better get yourself
prepared when you say pretty damn rough
what you mean well to find a mate or to
have a child or both both well we know
now that at the present time in the west
half of women 30 and younger don't have
a
child okay now we also know that couples
30 one in three couples at 30 already
have trouble conceiving and that
definition of trouble is one year of
attempt with no success okay so
fertility goes off a cliff at 35 so 30
you're pushing your luck at 30 at 35 you
are seriously pushing your luck I worked
for 10 years with a strata of the
highest achieving women likely in Canada
I had as part of my clinical practice
a offering that we made to consulting
firms and law firms and the offer was
send us your best people
and we'll work for them but the
consequence of that is that they'll be
even more productive so in the typical
Law Firm for example there's people who
don't do well then there's people who
are good lawyers then there are people
who are good lawyers that bring in
business there's like none of them
they're super valuable and if a law firm
has someone like that they want to keep
them and they're often women half the
time let's say um and those were the
women I worked with a bunch of men too
but all concentrated on the women here
those were the women I was working with
and they
were generally extremely attractive
extremely intelligent very hardworking
and very focused on Career Development
and they were they' done very well in
junior high school and high school then
they you know aced college and their
lsats and then when they were articling
the firms snapped them up quickly and
then they rocketed up towards
partnership and then then they were 30
and they all thought what the hell am I
doing working 70 hours a week with a
bunch of insanely competitive
men right and that is the question it's
like what are you doing
exactly and then even if you're
radically successful let's say in your
law school career if you get run over by
a bus on the way to
work the waters just close over you at
the firm and the firm continues on it's
not like anyone
cares not really so now I'm I'm not
saying that people shouldn't pursue a
career I'm not saying that but I would
say even in my case and I'm male so that
makes a big difference because men are
also oriented towards status competition
victory in a way that women just aren't
not at least not in the career domain
and the reason for that it's very
straightforward and the the thing that
makes men
by default most attractive to women is
their comparative success in the
hierarchy of men it's a walloping
predictor and it's irrelevant to men
like men don't care at all whether women
are successful in their career it's not
a determinant of their attractiveness in
fact it's
often the
contrary well these women that I'm
talking about they were often alone why
well they're beautiful so that like
intimidated 90% of men right there
they're smart so that's another 90% of
the remaining 10% they're accomplished
and
Wealthy well like first of all who's
going to approach them and second who
are they going to accept because women
are hypergamous right is that does that
mean that men are insecure
and sort of emasculated by a strong
successful woman
sure yeah well but there's reason for
that like
it's not weakness on the part of men
exactly it's the desire of the woman to
find someone who brings a benefit to the
relationship and why well she because a
woman will make herself vulnerable when
she has a child and so she's looking for
a man who be helpful compared to
her okay so if the woman is like full of
ability well then her standards for a
guy who's going to be helpful get very
high and that's hard on her because it
decreases the pool of available
candidates
radically so like there's a negative
relationship between IQ and women and
the probability of being
married so it's harsh now is it are men
intimidated well yes obviously are men
intimidated by beautiful women well you
can answer
that especially if you're young why the
probability that any given beautiful
woman is going to reject you when you're
a young man is like it's basically 100%
now it's not exactly 100% And there are
exceptions but the default response is
rejection and beautiful women get hit
on you know a fair bit some of the it's
interesting because there's a bunch of
stats which I find quite interesting one
of them is that sexlessness is increas
is increasing people having less and
less yeah that's fascinating it's that's
fascinating does it matter
oh it's a catastrophe and and why are we
having less sex what is the complex web
of factors that have brought us to this
place I know something like well one of
them I would say is that me in a in a
free and easy mating environment women
don't trust men and no wonder well here
here here's a terrible thing to know
so imagine that there are men who are
oriented towards short-term
relationships and there are men who are
oriented towards long-term relationships
committed relationships right okay so
that would be the men who want love long
with sex let's say love and commitment
then there's the party today because
we're all dead tomorrow sort of guys and
there's some women like that too
although few are women because they pay
a much higher price for sexual
impropriety so the pool of short-term
maters has more men in it okay what do
they like well the personality Studies
have already been done they're aelan
which means they use their language to
manipulate they're narcissistic which
means they want unearned social status
they're Psychopathic which makes them
predatory parasites and they're sadistic
okay so now you open up the mating
market so that shortterm deanes are
acceptable you throw all the women into
the hands of the
Psychopaths well that's a bad strategy
and it's no wonder that it decimates the
mating Market because women are thinking
well are those men trustworthy and the
answer is
no and sex is costly like we have this
immature delusion that we can free sex
from like the grip of the oppressive
patriarchy let's say it's like no you
can't obviously you can't there's it
emotional entanglements are an
inevitable consequence of intimate
physical relationships there's that then
there's the issue of abortion and
pregnancy that actually con dutes a
problem and then there's sexually
transmitted disease and that's just like
the first of a very long list of
potential problems with sex so there's
no simple sexual landscape and there are
diluted people who think they're there
is a simple landscape and that there
should be but most they tilt hard in the
psychopathic Direction because they're
manipulative do you believe in no sex
before marriage as a
concept as an ideal yeah
yeah yeah that's
right and and why would that result in
better relationships and a better
Society more broadly well here's one way
of looking at it so let's say you take
the alternative approach okay um you're
going to try your partner on for size so
you live together well first of all we
know that couples who live together are
more likely to get divorced rather than
less we know that the probability of
cheating is
proportionate to the number of Partners
before the marriage or the committed
relationship well well partly that's
just self-evidence like the best
predictor of future behavior is past
Behavior right so if you had a lot of
Partners you're the sort of person who's
likely to have a lot of Partners and
then the there's also a conceptual
problem it's like is are you shopping
for a car it's like you're going to take
it out for a test drive and see how it
goes okay that's not the right
metaphor and
then here's another problem I'm going to
see what it's like to be married by
living with this person it's like no
you're not because you don't know what
it's like to be married until you're
married whatever you're doing when you
live together that's not a model for
what you're going to do when you're
married because being married is
different it's permanent so you're
saying don't live together before you
well I know the stats on living together
it's like you live with someone and and
then you marry them you're more likely
to get divorced it doesn't work like the
the the theory was you try it out and if
it works you go ahead with it yeah yeah
well the theory was wrong because that
isn't that isn't what happens it
actually increases the probability that
the relationship will fail it's also
partly you got to ask yourself what the
message is I know what the message is
when you live with someone it's pretty
straightforward you'll do unless someone
better comes along and I'll Grant you
the same opportunity but Jesus that
that's a hell of a foundation for a mar
for a like long-term relationship so you
saying go go from single to married and
living together straight away without
the like Tri on period Well I don't know
exactly what the trial period should be
I mean people have
dated and I'm also not saying that this
is simple it's not simp why would it be
simple it's not there isn't anything
more difficult that you do in your
entire life than find a partner and
establish a family it's like it's going
to hard how to do it optimally well I
can tell you in my own experience you
know like I I've known my wife since she
was eight and we were friends good
friends and we kind of departed from
each other during adolescence um I was a
year younger than everyone in my class
and she matured faster women do anyways
and so that kind of split us apart and
we didn't get married till I think we
were about 27 something like that 28 but
it would have been better to do it
earlier so get married Al you yeah it's
just time I didn't have with
her what case would you make to me for
marriage versus because I'm I'll be
honest I'm wrestling with marriage not
just God um I'm trying to understand
what the what the point of marriage is
versus the relationship we have now is
but I can have children in the
relationship I have now
yeah the general rule of thumb for life
is that you should do what other people
have done forever unless you have a
really good reason not to don't deviate
from the straight narrow path like you
are already deviating in all sorts of
ways you're very entrepreneurial MH
right so your life has a variety of
adventurous Pathways you're going to
want
to put Firm Foundation wherever you can
that'll actually free you up to do more
adventurous
things children are a multigenerational
commitment because it's children and
grandchildren
and so the the marriage is a signifier
of that and in order to stay with
someone optimally over the longest
period of time possible it has to be
serious and for something to be serious
you have to throw everything at it you
know and you might say well love is
enough it's
like that's a very naive view of the
world because there'll be
times because that's kind of like saying
well as long as we love each other and
we're happy we'll be together it's like
well if you're talking 40 years there's
going to be plenty of years in there
where you're not happy and you probably
don't love each other so what then
you're going to just is it just going to
dissolve or are you going to say we're
in this you know come hell or high water
which is the vow come hell or high and
hell in high water they're coming and
then you got to ask yourself you know is
this the person you want in the boat
with you when hell and high water come
and that's not going to be fun that's
for sure you want to do it alone or you
think that when everything falls apart
around you you're going to be in a
better position to find someone better I
don't think so it's a long and then you
know you you take the marital vow in a
religious sense and you do it in front
of a community right so it's it
signifies commitment and you need that
because like you think you can maintain
all that commitment on your own maybe
you can I doubt it generally people
can't like no one we need to fortify
ourselves in all sorts of ways to get
through the things in life that are most
difficult but the traditional marriage
agreement one that's a legal agreement
yeah does it need to be can can I not
take my partner have a wedding in front
of our friends and family sign a
contract maybe even do it in a sort of
relig religious context without having
it to be a Rel like a legal document
that the government are involved in well
you could but is it not the same bond to
you there you're talking about a
multitude of different bonds right
fundamentally right you're the the one
that you're prioritizing is the bond
that's voluntary and predicated on what
the love of the moment I mean we want to
be precise here right that so I think
that's a reasonably reasonable way of
conceptualizing it and it is a romantic
view that that should Prevail and it's a
romantic view that that should be
sufficient I don't think it there's it's
often the case that it doesn't Prevail
and it's generally the the case that
it's not sufficient and so then you
might say well maybe you want to add a
legal element to that and you want to
add a metaphysical element to it because
those are all fortifications MH and
they're indications even to yourself
that you're serious it's not like we
understand ourselves you know like
people are just as mysterious to
themselves as someone else is mysterious
to them you go ask yourself it's like
okay well
what
processes what do I have to put in place
to sure that
I'm doing the right thing well when
you're embarking on something difficult
like marriage then you better have
everything necessary in place if you and
Tammy hadn't got married yeah and you
were just in a relationship like I am
with my
partner how do you think your life would
be different and do you think you I
don't think it would have lasted you
don't think your life would have lasted
oh well relation that's that that's
undoubtedly true
I mean both of us just about died in the
last 5 years and I don't mean by a
little bit I mean like it
was touch and go for a long time
so it was a good thing everything was in
place through that I mean the the waters
were pretty high for the last three
years four years socially professionally
physically the what are you wrestling
with exactly like in this issue you know
I mean you're it seems like you're
trying to sort out the relationship
between the emotional attachment and the
personal attachment and the social
structures that say surround marriage
it's it's complicated because even any
answer I might give you is if you go
down that spiral you might find
something at the bottom of it that's not
what I'm saying so what I mean by that
is definitely just as you asked that
question I just got a glimpse of I just
had a bit of a flash toct my issues with
commitment and how I watched okay so
what you fantasy no I just I just
remember recalling feeling like my dad
was in prison when he was in in his
relationship so I think that's still so
now I can tell you what to do with that
so you bring those images to mind right
so you've got this question in mind you
just you just found out something you
said that there's something at the
bottom of this okay now if you watch
your fantasies they'll shed light on
this descent into the abyss so to speak
now you had a flash of memory okay that
memory is associated with all sorts of
things you can bring that to mind and
let it play itself out right and it'll
explore the Contours of the problem that
you're now you put your finger on a very
important problem you said that you saw
in your father someone who's trapped in
his marriage yeah well it's no bloody
wonder you're leery of that right so now
you okay so now the question would be
what was the nature of that entrapment
what evidence did you have that that was
in fact the case how much of that was
him how much of that was her and what is
it that they did wrong and right you
need to know all of that and you need to
know how it affected you that's a great
obser see that's so cool because that
very frequently happens to people when
they ask a question that's like a
revelation so you ask a question that's
like a prayer the question is is there
something at the bottom of my the
trouble I'm having conceptualizing
marriage okay now you want to know
that's the first precondition okay then
you'll get memory images like that and
then people shy away it's like I don't
want to go there it's like yeah that's
for sure you bloody well don't want to
go there but you do because if it's
there you will go there right it'll
plague you and it'll plague your life
it'll it'll show its head continually in
your relationship or you can get to the
bottom of it which is people will fight
their whole life with their partner to
avoid getting to the bottom of something
that's how terrifying it is to get to
the bottom of something right
but if you do get to the bottom of it
then you don't have to fight for 30
years so that's very much worthwhile and
it'll Enlighten you as
well you know because you're you have a
real issue it's like how can marriage
not be a trap Yeah well yeah right
definitely that's a very good question
and and an important one how can
marriage be a trap how can not being
married be a trap how can being alone
being a trap be a trap how can being
deluded Ed about what holds people
together be a trap there's traps
everywhere man there's traps everywhere
and so there's no risk-free mo pathway
forward there's just risk everywhere
okay so that's a really useful thing to
know then the question would shift to
something like well if I wanted to
construct a relationship that had that
was
optimized that's what you have to ask
yourself it's like and your and your and
your partner it's like what we doing
here what do we want Tammy and I decided
for example when we first got married we
I well I mentioned this to her right
away when we decided that we were going
to take things seriously it was like
we're going to tell each other the
truth so that was part of the vision
like no matter what no matter what yeah
no matter what she's been very good at
that I would say better than me I've
been good at it but she's been really
quite remarkably good at it she really
threw herself into it and I mean
that's that causes an complete
transformation but there's plenty of
skeletons in the closet to be revealed
God that's for sure talking of things
that risk harming relationships one of
the things I wanted to ask you about
subject we've never spoke about before
but it ties into the themes of
relationships marriage and um and sex is
pornography and generally oh another
reason that sex has disappeared yeah
right right you talk about headism in
your book um we who wrestle with God
pornography is this a bad thing is a
terrible thing yeah it's a terrible
thing everything about it is terrible
really well first of all it's addictive
and no wonder I mean any 13-year-old
boy can now look at more
beautiful naked women in one day
than the greatest King who ever lived
managed in his whole
life right so it's like wow that's not
and talk me through the downstream
consequences of such a possibility easy
it's easy yeah it's easy to get what
sexual gratification that's not good
it's not supposed to be easy and it's
easy
so how desperate do you have to be to
get married
not desperate at all it's like yeah
right what do you know you don't know
anything I'm married just because I'm in
love you're an idiot God to to to to put
you in a position
where you're going to have the romantic
adventure of your life the true romantic
adventure of your life you're going to
need love and Desperation buddy you're
going to need everything working on your
side love desperation Terror shame guilt
everything working for you and so you
take the easy
Road pornography sure you're not
desperate
anymore so people that consume
pornography do you think they're less
motivated to attack life and to well
they're definitely less motivated to
pursue sexual relationships with women
by way of that are they then less likely
to then want to go to the gym or have a
career definitely it's an interesting
idea how much how much of what men do do
they do to impress women a lot like yeah
like all of it
all of it I mean the status battles that
men back to the law firms for example so
the the men I worked with they're very
concerned with their bonuses and their
and their you know their end of the year
performance reports why well part of it
was the money most of them had lots of
money it's like I'd asked them they say
well that's the money is how we keep
score well what does that mean well it's
money is the way that men in those
competitive Enterprises say they they
compare themselves to one another and
why do they want to be at the top cuz
women peel from the top so men are
trying to impress women all the time and
they'll do it in positive ways and in
pathological ways the window for sexual
representation started to open in the
1920s let's say but it really got going
with Playboy then Penthouse came out
right after that and Penthouse was like
full frontal nudity display and then
Hustler came out and Hustler was sort of
well whatever Penthouse didn't show you
Hustler will show and it got pretty low
brow like it was a rough low class
magazine it didn't it just shed all the
pretentions that Playboy and Penthouse
had and then the net came along it's
like all those Engineers who couldn't
establish a relationship with an actual
woman exchanging pornography what 25% of
internet traffic something like that
that desire to exchange pornography was
that what created the
net
yeah was a huge part of it what's that
done well as you pointed out I think 30%
now of Japanese men and women under 30
are virgins it's about the same in Korea
relationships between men and women are
falling apart in the in the rest of the
West in the same sort of
way now can you attribute that to
pornography
certainly part like if I was a young
woman and I was looking at the
pornography World online I'd think yeah
maybe not one of the interesting things
we noticed when we're doing some
research on this was what the top Google
search around this subject matter is how
do I quit and I think like the third one
is how do I quit and and that it's in
such high quantity of people searching
Google for how to quit pornography that
it feels desperate like it feels
desperate well why wouldn't it it be
addictive like and why doesn't
pornography feel good to people that's a
good question that's a good question
well there's nothing heroic about it
that's for sure it's like it's it's
obviously nothing to be proud of that's
a different issue than whether or not
it's wrong right it's certainly not an
accomplishment yeah I mean I don't think
anyone would disagree about that it's
not an accomplishment well maybe sex is
supposed to be an
accomplishment maybe you violate the
spirit of sex uality itself when it's
not an accomplishment you certainly do
that if you rape mhm
right so is it an
accomplishment
probably so what if your accomplishment
is false well then are what are you
betraying well if it's associated with
sex maybe you're betraying the most
fundamental possible thing certainly
Poss like what there's life and sex
that's pretty much that right
you're alive and you reproduce from a
biological perspective and so you're
violating the spirit of what you're
maybe you're violating the spirit of
relationship maybe you're violating the
spirit of Adventure the spirit of
Romance the spirit of reproduction the
spirit of
Life
likely it's it's so interesting that
people seem to be a lot of people seem
to be angry at it they they seem to be
angry with what it's done to should
angry they should be angry even on an
individual level people seem in the
comment section of these episodes that
we've done about the subject matter
people seem to be angry about its
existence and what it's done to them
they should be angry they should be
outraged it's outrageous it's outrageous
would you ban it if you were in charge
of the
world I don't know how to answer that I
think any policy that policies that
require Force rather than voluntary
compliance are generally bad
policies there are restrictions that
should be placed on its
distribution but I would have to spend a
lot of time thinking through what those
were from a policy
perspective I think it's wrong no I
don't think I know it's wrong that
doesn't mean I know how that should be
dealt with at the level of policy it's
complicated I do understand why young
men and young women are angry about it
it's like where are the adults where are
the adults where have they gone they're
not protecting like 11-year-old kids
from what you can see on the
net you know I remember when I was a kid
I I I got a hold of some of these
underground comics from the 1960s and a
lot of the underground com comic artists
were they are pretty pathological
creatures like Robert crumb's a good
example Crum led a pretty good life for
someone as demented as he is and there's
a very famous documentary made about the
crumb brothers and Robert crumb was the
establisher he was one of the people who
established the genre of graphic novel
really back in the 60s in heid Ashbury
in San Francisco and his imagination
goes places that you don't want to you
don't want to be along for the ride
seriously like seriously and I read some
of that material when I was like 11 you
know I never forgot it it was shocking
as hell and like typical 11-year-old now
it's
like there are things that he is going
to see that he'll never forget it's not
good and the brain is still forming at
that age isn't it so it's oh definitely
interesting way to shock the bra well we
also don't know well that's right we
have no idea whatsoever what a diet of
pornography exposure does to somebody
who's you know making their way through
puberty what would you say to the those
individuals then that have been Googling
that like how to quit because I imagine
if we thought about percentages I'd say
what 90% of people that are listening
right now watch pornography at least I
don't know what the numbers are but but
it's a lot of lot of people it's the
vast majority write down write down what
it's doing to you write down what it's
doing to write down every exhaustively
everything you think it might be doing
to you write it down everything don't
don't worry about whether you're right
or not like maybe it's not doing some of
the things you think it might be doing
but make an exhaustive list
then start thinking through is like is
that what you want is that what you want
and then write down what you want
instead that'll help because if you're
going to
look any hedonistic Endeavor is
rewarding in the moment obviously the
problem is is the price you pay for it
in the medium to long run right that's
the problem it's the contradiction
between those two things that's the
problem okay now if you want to quit
doing something that's gratifying in the
short term you need to know why right
because otherwise you won't have the
willpower you won't have
the the part of you that thinks well
what the hell will win what the hell
which is what people think when they do
something they shouldn't do and they
should notice what they say to
themselves when when they're making that
rationalization because what the hell
refers to
hell and you the reason to stop doing
things that are self-destructive is
because they're self destructive I mean
is that the sort of person you want to
be is that the model you'd like to have
for your son for example is that the way
you would imagine that someone you
admire would act these are good
questions to ask
yourself no are you the sort of person
that is acting out a pattern that you
think is admirable I don't think
pornography masturbation fits into the
ideal of heroic
masculinity I don't think anybody thinks
that it's there's something furtive
about it and second rate obviously like
OB it's ridiculous in a sense that we
even have to have this discussion
because
obviously well these things creep in
don't they to society and they
become first they creep then they
Rampage we almost can't remember a time
if you're a young person when there
wasn't pornography you you definitely
can't remember you open up an app and
you get absolutely 100% oh and it's
going to get way worse wait till there
are AI equipped adjustable
pornographic succu by then we're really
going to have fun cuz we're already at a
at the point now where with a decent
chatbot a really alienated young man can
have a better conversation with a decent
chatbot than with anybody he's ever
talked to in his entire
life right now they're going to get a
lot smarter and soon they're going to
have like well you can all there's
already Services of this sort available
they'll be fully
fleshed out two-dimensional women
they're not women simulacra of
women right so yeah it's interesting
because with my head in design your own
girlfriend she w't call she give you she
don't argue with you she won't do the 90
minutes a week yeah right right she'll
give you everything you want but that's
not true she'll give the worst part of
you everything it wants Jesus that's not
good the worst weakest part of you will
get get exactly what it wants that's not
good that's Ser that's seriously not
good I mean that's what pornography is
kind of doing right definitely yeah well
and there's an edge to it too right
because one of
the pleasure is enhanced by
novelty right so so that that brings up
an issue with regards to marriage you
know I talked to Bill Maher Bill's
alone and he's my age
you know and that's painful but he said
to me you know in his Hollywood
hedonistic manner that he really
couldn't imagine being with the same
woman you know for any length of time
it's a novelty issue it's like
well are you restricted by the woman or
are you restricted by the limits of your
own
imagination this is an important
question like I would
say if you establish the optimized
relationship with someone you they're
inexhaustible that doesn't mean novelty
isn't important it's important that's
part of
play so yeah a lot of people struggle
with that got a lot of friends that
struggle with this idea of being with
the same person forever um the same
person the problem well but that's
really no look I I understand like I
know that novelty enhances pleasure so
the question is how do you keep your
relationship alive that means novel you
play it's interesting because actually
what I actually think is happening there
is it's not that they are miserable with
the same person forever it's actually
the thought that's kind of what I said
the thought of being with the same
that's part that trap yeah well okay so
that's very good observation because
what see because that thought is going
to have a story attached to it the story
is going to be something like well I'm
with this person we both become
unattractive quite rapidly we get
alienated from one another there's no
sexual dynamism or romance or excitement
and then we just sit you know and eat
like cold eggs while looking at each
other harshly over the table at
breakfast for 40 years yeah well yeah
that's
dismal so you know maybe don't do that
yeah yeah there's an element of control
to it on this point of headism as well I
was thinking because we're talk about
pornography but there's many types of
headism in my life whether it's you know
eating the
the cookie this is a I don't actually do
this but it's a metaphor of eating the
cookie from the mini bar in my hotel
room here in New York at 1:00 a.m. in
the morning when I know tomorrow I'm
going to regret it there's all these
forms of headism like scrolling on Tik
Tok or whatever it might be and headism
shows up in my life in these little
uncontrolled like oh gosh [__] made a
mistake of course and it sometimes shows
up when I'm disabled in some way
emotionally disabled and so it's almost
it feels like it's a form of medicine
now I I could write down on this page
who I want to be I could say I don't
want to be the person eats the cookie I
don't want to be on Tik Tok I don't want
to watch pornography all those kinds of
things but then staving off that moment
where you know you're you're weakened in
some way and I use that word maybe
you're weakened in some way by something
tired or
whatever sticking to those principles
when in that moment when it's hard is
that just again a case of just being
clear on what I want in the long ter
well that helps it helps practice helps
um surrounding yourself with people who
have the same aim and that keep
you um responsible MH accountable that
helps oh yeah you need all of that
because that battle the battle between
immediate gratification and medium to
long-term investment that's a real
battle you know like the the right
amount of pleasure in the moment isn't
zero yeah okay I want to live a life of
misery so well right right and you can't
you don't want to be the joy grind for
whom everything is
tomorrow yeah right it's very hard to
because what you're trying to do is
you're trying to optimize emotion and
strategy over all time frames and you
don't know how long that time frame is
well that that's also a problem exactly
exactly might have one day left or right
so I don't need to well we also know you
know when people are say off to a battle
in Wartime they party like there's no
tomorrow well
because maybe there isn't so
definitely the the religious insistence
is that you should live in the light of
Eternity right is that you should
attempt to conduct yourself in a manner
that is best All Things Considered over
the longest possible conceivable span of
time now does that mean don't have the
desert no no because no it doesn't mean
that because look in the biblical text
for example there is an insistence that
uh the spirit of the Divine wants the
provision of life more abundant that's
the language the the idea of a fruitful
Garden an Earthly Garden of delights
even that's part and parcel of a vision
of paradise it's not joyless it's it's
harmoniously balanced I think best way
to think about it is likely musically
you know in in a musical piece that's
great every know has its place every
note has its proper place in
relationship to the whole right but
every note is also worthwhile well
that's what you want is you want to
balance your concentration on the
present with your apprehension of the
medium to long run so I'll give you an
example that so I did I did a course for
Peterson Academy called It's On The
Sermon on the Mount And The Sermon on
the Mount is the longest record we have
of Christ's Direct utterances let's say
and it constitutes the core of Christian
ethics it's a set of instructions and
the instructions are very
specific so essentially the instruction
is to aim at every moment at what's
highest okay so this something you have
to practice okay so the idea is that at
each moment you're bringing to Bear a
certain attitude and the attitude is I'm
going to do what's best
okay all things considered for me now
for me now in a way that works tomorrow
and next week and next month and next
year and five years from now and 10
years from now in relationship to my
wife in relationship to my kids to my
parents to my community right it's that
whole identity you're optimizing that
now you might not know how but that's
your aim okay so that's that's the
injunction to put the love of God above
all else to aim at what's highest now
you don't exactly know how to do that
but that doesn't matter you can specify
your aim right now no doubt you do
something like that with your
podcast right that's why it's successful
yeah okay you agree with that yeah why
because it's it's difficult isn't it
there's just immense pressure when
you're a podcaster um to aim at
something else and you have to me and
Jack talk about this a lot you have to
have like a certain set of principles
that are unnegotiable but whatever
principles you choose and believe in
they come at a great cost okay what are
the principles so see this is worth
delving into because You' be very
successful as aast one of my principles
is I will I try not to judge the people
I'm speaking to and I try not to come in
with um preconceptions I take them as I
meet them I I try not to I'm in such of
genuine curiosity in them or some kind
of answer or truth
right so there's a surch in it yeah it's
that's a quest so you know an adventure
story is a quest did I answer that
question yeah yeah yeah there there's
only one thing I would take issue with
you said that you don't judge see I
would say probably you don't condemn you
have to judge because you have to listen
and you have to separate wheat from
chaff you have to evaluate but you can
do that without careless condemn
condemnation or a priori what would you
say like a tyrannical is insistence that
what you know now is sufficient okay
exactly yeah yeah you want to not people
say I'm not judgmental it's like that's
not a virtue you want to be you want to
use judgment all the time but that's not
to con like I could judge you so I don't
ever have to listen to you about
anything yeah judgment might happen in
my head but it's then about how I treat
the person based on that judgment I
don't want to treat them based I don't
want to have some like higher um
egotistical values I'm I'm correct and
that yeah yeah that's that's right
that's exactly it that's a hypocritical
moralizing it's the moralizing it's like
I think I'm better than you because
that's exactly exactly that's right you
don't want to you definitely don't want
to do that in the podcast journalists
the pathological journalists they that's
all they do all they're doing is
establishing moral
superiority on the flimsiest possible
grounds at the least possible cost in
the most spectacular way yeah it's
really not it's hard being a podcaster
especially in this particular moment
where there's been such a
focus on podcasting because of what's
happened in this election cycle yeah you
really have to be clear on what you
believe in because the winds are going
to blow like that the world is going to
try and sway you they're going to say
you can't speak to this person you have
to speak to this person don't do that
don't do this this is wrong and you go
okay so how do I weather such a storm
when when I know the storm is coming I
have to look to Rogan to go yeah look at
what you know Rogan The Arc of Rogan and
if I'm if I'm also a podcaster just keep
asking stupid
questions yeah well that but you know
that is that Quest that and and what
people want in a discussion is a quest
they want to see blood hounds on the
trail towards some truth that's what
they're after they want to participate
in that same with the public lectures I
do I'm always trying to answer a
question I don't know what the answer is
when I go on stage it's a real question
do you think Joe has Joe Rogan I've
never actually met him but do you think
he's just has great faith in humans and
there because there's obviously been a
lot of pressure on on him so how he
survived that is he just has faith in
who he is he has faith in his own
ignorance okay and that those watching
which is a lot of people watching Rogan
will understand yeah yeah yeah yeah
Joe's on a quest he's trying to be
smarter than he is that's what Joe does
it's curiosity that's driving him this
is what musk said too about himself and
he said that's to me when I interviewed
him he said that was how he reconciled
he had a terrible existential crisis
when he was like 13 you know and he
reconciled that essentially with the
quest he decided that he could just
pursue truth pursue knowledge pursue
understanding and that that would that's
meaningful intrinsically and valuable
intrinsically and that's the beginnings
of a religious orientation or more than
the beginnings even because the quest is
a religious Pursuit it's pursuit of the
truth it's pursuit of the treasure that
the dragon guards right and so treasures
and Dragons they're always in the same
place it's very annoying it's a good
thing to know though because if a dragon
shows up you can always ask yourself
where the treasure is might be close
it's
there so okay so back to The Sermon on
the Mount because we're talking about
orientation so aim
up assume that other people have the
same value as you do and that that value
is associated with whatever is divine
and and then concentrate on the moment
mhm right so it's the the most distant
possible upward aim with the most
intense possible concentration on the
moment right you're good at
that that's what that's I can't say
that's what's made you successful but
it's certainly part of it
because you pay attention see that's
that's what paying attention means
because you want your your your intent
to be focused because otherwise your
attention is fragmented so you want your
attention to be focused now your
attention is focused on something now we
we we pulled it apart a little bit you
said that you're you know you have these
principles and that you're trying to
learn and so your attention is pretty
focused and then you bring all that to
bear in the moment right and then people
find that compelling because they're on
they're they're along for the ride
they're long for the adventure and that
is Meaningful it's the essence of
meaningful and so so so what we were
trying to address was the relationship
between Hedonism and and say intelligent
long-term pro-social strategy you can
you want the both you want you want
there's a
optimized solution that delivers both
far better than any other solution this
is the pearl of great price that Christ
speaks about that anyone wise and
Wealthy would sell everything they own
to purchase there isn't anything better
than that for the for the person
listening right now that is struggling
with this concept of like we talked
about headism discipline like they're
just so far from it because there's a
scale of people that are you know able
to stay focused on the long term for the
people at the very other end of the
scale who just look at their lives and
go I just I hear what he's
saying for some reason it's not working
like I can't get out of this situation y
you meet maybe you can't start on the
porn side then you know like my this
is how a good behavior analyst
approaches problems of that sort it's
like
okay is there something in your life
that you know is not right that you
could improve that you would
improve any step
whatsoever well generally you can just
ask yourself that question it's like
it's a contemplative exercise sit on the
edge of your bed and think okay where is
my life off-kilter
is so then then you have a variety of
ideas about how yeah okay okay I'm on my
mom's bed I'm me I've got no
relationship my job's crap I hate it
okay then I'd say zero in on one of
those yeah and find some small thing
that you could fix that you would fix
why a small thing well because look at
you you're completely godamn useless you
you better find something small that you
can do now if you can find a big thing
good but obviously you haven't been able
to CU all these problems exist so
see one of the emphasis in the religious
realm let's say is humility one of the
things that's emphasized well what's
humility what's the opposite of Pride
well humility is starting where you
are that's what humility is and it's
annoying because you know like if your
life is a mess then you have to see that
you're the person in that mess then you
have to understand that your
first attempt to redress the mess might
not be something you're particularly
proud of you know I mean I saw this Lots
in my clinical practice where people
would the first steps they had to take
to put things in order were pretty
embarrassing it's like really that's all
I can
do hey man uphill is better than
downhill and there's a Doctrine in the
gospels that Christ puts forward which
is very interesting he says uh it's the
Matthew principle it's called to those
who have everything more will be given
from those who have nothing everything
will be
taken okay so it it lays out a view of
the world
progress regression that's one model
here's another one
progress
regression this is the right model so
even if you have to start small you
incre you ACR success in um
exponentially you acre defeat
exponentially too that's the abyss that
is hell you start going downhill you go
downhill faster and faster start going
uphill you go uphill faster and faster
so even if you have to start small or
even painfully small which is highly
probable especially if you're trying to
tackle something that's really plagued
you doesn't really matter house
small take I would say take the step
that you can take that you will take
that actually feels like some
accomplishment imagine you're dealing
with a three-year-old kid and you want
to encourage him okay you want to set
him a task that he you don't want him to
say Dad I could do that when I was
two right but you don't want to set him
a task that there's not a chance he'll
manage you want to set him a task that
will stretch him Beyond where he is that
has a reasonable probability of success
right why why stretch him from where he
is well because you want to grow I mean
look if you love a child you love the
child for who he is and who he could be
and you want
to indicate your love for both of
those I think if you're a father you
tilt even more towards love for who the
child could be what is self-belief in
this context because people people
everyone's looking so many people are in
search of two words I think that's three
words but self-belief and confidence
idence yeah and in this context of that
small task how is that building my
self-belief or confidence yeah because
you watch yourself do it and that does
work to well well look if you see
someone a friend who is continually
incrementally improving you're going to
well maybe you'll be jealous and
resentful and bitter and miserable and
try to undermine them but assuming
you're not like completely encapsulated
by dark Forces you'll think oh that's
admirable well you you see the same
thing in yourself you have to
act you have to develop an opinion of
yourself the same way you would develop
an opinion of someone else so now and
I'm not hypothesizing about this by the
way we know this clinically if I want to
truly help you build your
confidence rather than
merely readjusting the words you say
about yourself which which would be
something like self-esteem which is
something that doesn't even exist by the
way it's just a pathological concept
altogether you want confidence okay more
to the point you want the confidence
that's based in competence otherwise
it's narcissistic okay so how do you
develop that well you watch yourself
exceed your
limits and then you think oh look at
that there's something in me that can
exceed my limits that's your true self
that's a good way of thinking about it
and in doing so you actually realize
that limits exist and you imposed one on
yourself in the first place well you
that's one of the things you can realize
certainly that that also you don't
exactly know where the limits are it's
like oh I exceeded that it's like okay
well now what what's the upward limit to
exceed what's the upward Arc of
exceeding limits that's Jacob's lad I
would say this is the promise of the
kingdom of God that's one way of
thinking about it there's no upward
limit there's no limit how bad things
can get no one would deny that who has
any
sense so that means in a way that hell
exists you can find your way there with
no problem in terms of energy there are
so many reasons why I'm a big matcha fan
if you don't already know by now and so
much so that I actually invested in the
UK's leading matcha company called
perfect Ted and one of my favorite
perfect Ted products is these delicious
matcha pouches that come in every flavor
from salted caramel to Peach flavor to
mint flavor to Berry flavor one of my
favorites is this vanilla flavor which
I'm going to make in just two seconds
you just take this mixer here get a
little bit of the powder pop it on top
of the shaker like that put the lid
on shake shake
shake delicious if you haven't tried
this yet you can find perfect Ted at
Tesco and Holland Barrett stores or
online where you can get 40% off with my
code
diary 40 head to perfect.com and put in
code diary 40 to try this delicious
multi-flavored match now highly
recommend and if you do it please tag me
send me a message online it's
interesting what's going on with young
men in particular at the moment because
it does appear and I don't have the
stats on this in front of me but it does
appear that young men are more and more
in search of some type of religion yeah
definitely I think I think Islam I think
I read Islam's On The Rise amongst young
men or it's the the dominant religion
that young men are being drawn to but in
the context of what we've described that
person who sat on the edge of their bed
do they need religion and I'm being
intentional not to say God I'm saying
religion well it's these are hard things
to do on your own right I mean you only
have the span of your life and the
probability that you can figure out how
to live merely as a consequence of
Consulting your own limited experience
is zero it's too complicated so the
religion might be your societ it might
be your friends your family in in this
context is that's part of it that that
would be the more structured part the
more traditional part you need the
traditional
stories that's why I wrote this book is
to indicate well at least in part well
what the stories are and also what what
they mean it's not only that it's not
only what they mean it's how knowing
what they mean changes your life so for
example in the story of
Abraham God comes to AB Abraham okay
now questions emerge from that
statement what do you mean God and how
does he come to Abraham what the hell
does that mean well the story lays that
out the god that comes to Abraham is the
voice of
Adventure it's a
definition this is a good thing to
know God is the voice of
Adventure okay so now think let's think
about this a little bit so the god
that's the voice of Adventure is the god
of the forefathers of Abraham the father
he's a patriarchal Spirit okay if you're
a good father you speak with the voice
of Adventure to your
sons obviously you know you're
encouraging them it's like get the hell
out there you know make something of
yourself why do you do that because you
have this little kid and you think get
at it man let's see what you can be and
so that's that voice of the benevolent
father and that's the spirit of the
ancestors and behind that there's the
god who's the voice of Adventure if you
pursue the spirit of
Adventure there will be things you have
to give
up right you know that I mean you know
you you're taking steps we'd even stay
that steps forward in your life what do
you mean forward what do you mean steps
well there are Little Adventures you
have that transform you and transform
your circumstances okay you have that
adventure and you have to change
as a consequence of it you have to give
up your immaturity so that you can take
advantage of this new
opportunity okay and that changes you
now you're a slightly different person
now A New Horizon of opportunity opens
up you have to make a sacrifice it's
like okay looks like if I'm going to do
this I can no longer afford this well
Abraham changes so dramatically that he
gets a new name he starts as Abraham and
he ends is Abraham Abraham is the father
of Nations so what's the moral if you
pursue the spirit of Adventure and make
the proper sacrifices you become the
father of
Nations right that's
true there's a really interesting I I
grew up as religious until I was 18 I
say religious because terms difficult to
Define to me but um my my mother's was
believed in God she was Christian my
father's Christian and at about 18 I
started reading of Richard Dawkins books
and other people's books and I got to
this place where I think I was atheist
by the definition of I didn't think
there was necessarily a God and now I
find myself in this place of being
agnostic now when I think about the
Bible as a compass or as a as a guide
the the part of my brain that's like
rooted in this like I need evidence for
everything goes is this just a book that
a bunch of men wrote thousands of years
ago when they were sat around a campfire
or whatever and if if it is then it's
just one person's opinion as much as any
as much much as any self-help book on a
shelf is one person's opinion well okay
let's take that claim apart I mean yes
it is stories that people came up with
thousands of years ago but no definitely
not one person's opinion definitely 100%
not because these stories have been
transmitted over Millennia and organized
and edited and transformed by a very
large number of people so it's at
minimum it's a massive Collective effort
and it's a collective under effort
undertak by arguably the most literate
and intelligent people there are and
that'd be the Jews why would I listen to
the Bible more than I'd listen to
something Socrates wrote or any
philosopher oh there's a huge overlap
between the the Greco the Greek
philosophical tradition and and the
Christian tradition I
mean Western culture is the amalgamation
of Greece Jerusalem and Rome so and the
early Christians saw tremendous
parallels between Christian Theology and
Greek philosophy where do you think we
we come from you know you've got the
like Darwinism evolutionary theory of
we've evolved Etc then there's the more
religious view that you know if you
really think about the the first
testament and um the early Testament and
the stories of the you know
creation people think you know maybe we
were just popped out of nowhere but
where do where do we youth believe that
we come from do you believe a God put us
here or do you believe that do you
believe evolution is true do you believe
both are true you have to read the book
but I want I want to I know and fair but
but I I'm not trying to be a a smart
alic in in that response it's a
complicated answer yeah right it's a
complicated answer I think that we're
Guided by the spirit of
meaning okay I think that's also our
deepest Instinct that's somewhat D wiium
well I had a rule for this book is I
didn't make any claims about the
biblical stories that I couldn't justify
scientifically I don't think there's a
conflict I I think that viewing the
biblical stories as an amalgam of
superstitious protos scientific theories
is absurd I don't think there's any
evidence for that at all these are
stories So Stories and scientific
hypotheses aren't the same thing the
Lord of the Rings is not a scientific
hypothesis but that doesn't mean it's
not true do you believe my great great
great great Granddad was a an
amoeba well if you go you were a sperm
at one point I mean it's not that
implausible we all come from single
celled organisms this is I'm asking
these questions because I'm genuinely
it's like I'm genuinely wrestling with a
bunch of big existential questions that
I've actually only been wrestling with
maybe for like I'd say a year yeah so
it's very fresh for me and it's funny my
arc here is religious Christian up until
maybe 18 yeah like staunch atheist for
two years to the point that it was like
my identity yeah and then like yeah let
go of that drifted for a couple of years
and find myself it's really interesting
point where I'm like back at the door of
like okay let's re look at some of these
answers again yeah well that's exactly
why I wrote this book because I know
that that's the time and it's not just
the time for you that's the time that
we're in yeah it's the time we're in
100% oh definitely definitely well it's
partly
because the enlightenment has exhausted
itself partly because it was wrong it's
failed us the individual I think
exhausted is a better word because it
wasn't like the enlightenment was
without its
benefits technological progress the the
hypothet the materialist reductionism
of the atheist scientist okay it's not
right factually they were wrong their
theory of perception was wrong they're
wrong we see the world through a story
we do not see the world as a collection
of facts they're wrong you see the
postmodernists figured this out and
that's why the postmodernist had a
walloping influence on culture now I'm
no fan of the postmodernist for a
variety of reasons but their insistence
that we see the world through a story
that they're right that's right I agree
I mean if you if you obviously read the
book sapiens um by novel Harari and his
central point is that what bound us as
humans and stop us being these scattered
chimps with stories they bind us
together so I completely understand that
we need a story it's how everything
money governments Etc function but what
that story is now I can I can agree that
a story of voluntary
sacrifice 100% agree that humans need
that there's no chance that we'd be here
otherwise and it's a set of values and
principles now those values and
principles are often found in religion
but do they and and a belief in a God
but do they have to be could they be
found in could I theoretically make a
new religion where me and my friends
all unite against a set of values
sacrifice give that's a great question
well this is what n basically
presupposed in some ways so when when n
observed that God had died say in 1850
or
thereabouts his medication for that his
warning was we'll descend into nihilism
and communist
totalitarianism and that was exactly
right maybe a Mindless Hedonism in there
too dovi concentrated more on that nche
said we'll have to create our own values
we'll have to become that's what the
Superman is the nian Superman the man
who creates his own values mhm
try see what happens you can't do it you
can't create your own values because
values are
real they're not arbitrary they're not
relativistic so imagine this imagine
there's a very large number of games
that could be played like an infinitely
large number but there's a very small
number of games that people want to play
then there's even a smaller number of
games that sustain themselves and
improve as you play them okay so that's
like a landscape you could think about
it as a landscape of potential patterns
of interaction you could even think
about it as a landscape of potential
tribal
affiliations right the rules of those
games would be the principles of the
society okay now the question your
question is could we come up with our
own set of rules and the answer to that
is no why
because the sustainable abundant
playability of a game
is not arbitrary so for example if you
want to get along with your
wife she has to want to play the game
you're playing mhm okay now there's lots
of games you could play that aren't
going to fit that criteria yeah now then
imagine it's even worse though because
to get along with your wife you she has
to want to play the game you want to
play but both of you have to play a game
that works today and tomorrow and next
week next month next year right and then
you have to play it with your kids and
your parents and a bunch of other people
so can I ask then so is it the case that
humans are designed in such a way where
there's a certain set of values and
stories that are most conducive with
their reproductive survival and so if
that's true and I completely agree
understand why that would be true
because this true true for all species
like there's a set of stories and
narratives probably in my dog if you go
back to a 100 years from when his
ancestors were in the wild that he
needed to subscribe to to reproduce to
be a dog and to survive as a dog but so
the question then becomes where do those
values come from are they innate within
us because of our environmental factors
so I need to be this way because of the
environment I live in so that I can have
sex with somebody and reproduce because
of I have two arms two legs Etc I'm this
Advanced chimp or do they come from
above somewhere and they're granted down
to me because if I look at every animal
not or and oh and okay yeah yeah it's
the same thing it it's you're looking at
the same problem from two different
perspectives it's and yes they're handed
down from on high yes their instincts so
who they handed down
from well the the the religious do you
struggle with this question well it's a
complicated question question but you
struggle with the
answer I I struggle with making the
answer simple enough to offer rapidly
are you clear yourself on
it not as clear as I could be what is it
you wrestle
with I've said well Clarity is part of
it I mean we we want to make things as
clear as possible breadth of Co coverage
right I mean I'm people ask me what I
believe and say well I'm not hiding what
I believe I'm like I lecture about it I
podcast about it I write about it it's
like that's what I believe there it is
is there obfuscation in that well some
partly things are complicated so it's
it's very difficult to give short
answers to complex questions they you
tend to give if you give short answers
to complex questions the answers tend to
be symbolic yeah you have to say
something like where do they come from
it's like well they come from
God now is that a useful answer well
it's a short answer so it's useful in
that it's short it begs the question
what do you mean by God we could return
to that in the story of Abraham these
are
definitions because if you're going to
talk about what's properly put in the
highest place you have to know what
you're talking about okay in the story
of Abraham the voice of Adventure is to
be put in the highest place and if you
follow that then you become the father
of Nations that's reproductive success
UC mhm right so that means the idea is
that there's an alignment between the
Instinct that calls you to Adventure and
the probability that you'll be
attractive to women in the manner that
ensures the survival of your descendants
and is that environmental it's both is
it's both it's both it's emerges as a
consequence of the constraints of social
interaction let's say like there's
constraints for example on what makes a
man desirable to a woman yeah right that
has nothing to do with you those
constraints those are there right
they're there in
the Society of women they're Eternal
they're not no woman she might vary in
her opinion to some degree but she
partakes of the pattern so it's there
now it's also built into you because
you're a social creature and so your
physiology
indicates to you the nature of that
pattern so does my dog have a different
religion to me does he have a different
God to some
degree it's it's there's an overlap
because you can communic the dog your
dog understands you and vice versa so
there's there's that's a good
question social mammals understand each
other right so there's an overlap in
their deepest instincts or their highest
impulses you can think about that both
ways I was I was going through my head
and thinking about like the Venus fly
trap and my my do my French Bulldog
Pablo and they all need a different set
of behaviors and principles and values
to Survive and Thrive and be happy well
you you could think about that as sure
sure I was thinking then does that mean
that they all have a
different yeah they have a different
intrinsic nature that's another way of
thinking about it yeah because of the
environment and the factors that they
face as that species so then Pablo's God
might be slightly different to my God if
we're talking about cuz I'm trying to
understand if like this idea of God is a
set of evolutionary
motivations yes that it is and it is
that you can think about it as rising up
from the material world or descending
from on Heaven it doesn't matter it
doesn't matter fundamentally it's the
same it doesn't matter there those are
different ways of looking at the same
problem when I say evolutionary
motivations it doesn't feel so Divine it
doesn't feel like a place a reason to
gather in a church it feels like like
I'm just kind of a a robot that's being
steered by these motivations of don't do
that do this this feels good if you're
with your friends and family you feel
good so do that more and if you're with
your friends and family you're safer so
you're more likely to have kids or is it
this sort of divine thing that we we
Society have told us God is where we
should worship and we should thank you
so much and go to a church and get on
our knees and pray because if there have
two very different things one is like
practical and pragmatic and the other
one is this divine
okay here's one way of thinking about it
so I mentioned that in the story of
Abraham God is the Call to Adventure
okay so that's a definition now the the
the Divine that's put forward in these
library of stories has multiple
characteristics he's characterized in
many ways but there's an insistence that
that reflects an underlying Unity now
the unity is incomprehensible in its
essence
okay so you have to accept that as the
initial starting point you're you're not
going to get the answer yeah okay you
can you can see something complex from a
variety of different perspectives okay
in the story of Noah God is the impulse
that comes to the wise to
prepare when trouble's Brewing yeah okay
now now okay so now you can think of
that as an instinct you can think about
it as got Instinct intuition negative
emot
anxiety but but it's more than that
because it's you can be afraid of
something that isn't real yeah okay now
you might have to ask yourself okay what
are the preconditions for your fear what
are the
preconditions to the validity of your
fear so you're afraid and you should be
well let's say that's a characteristic
of someone who's
wise okay so then the question is well
what's the essence of the wisdom that
makes your fear valid
Noah is described in the story of Noah
as a man wise in his
Generations so that means that by the
moral standards of his time he's an
upstanding human being okay so now you
can imagine that means he exists in
harmonious relationship with his present
self and his future self okay that makes
him mature but then he also does that in
a way that serves his wife and his
family and his community MH so his self
is is balanced and optimized across
those parameters that makes
him secure in his foundation and
properly oriented if you're secure in
your foundation and properly oriented
upward then there's no difference
between the voice of the Divine and the
Instinct for the Instinct that preserves
you in times of trouble but you see you
can't exactly get there by the mere
bottomup materialistic notion because
you could think of about the fear that
guides Noah as an instinct but the
instinct is pathological unless it
exists in this wider moral
framework because then you could have
the fear of a coward well that's not
helpful The Wider moral framework could
that wider moral framework just
be I'm in My DNA I'm hardwired to want
to
reproduce because yeah but rep even
reproduction isn't see this is I think
where Dawkins went dreadfully wrong sex
and reproduction aren't the same thing
for people not anymore certainly well
not at all because we're High investment
reproducers sex just gets the ball
rolling so so here's a question how
would you have to act to maximally
ensure the survival of your Offspring
okay so
now what do you mean survival do you
mean that your son lives do you mean
that your grandson lives do you mean
that 20 Generations down the road from
you the pattern that you represented is
still propagating itself successfully
does it mean that the people that you
produce are able to take on all
Challengers because of the manner in
which they conduct themselves that's a
lot more complicated than just sex like
way more complicated so the pattern that
Abraham so Abraham is the father of
Nations
right the
there's an insistence in the story that
the manner in which he conducts
himself as a hero establishes the
pattern that makes his
descendants successful
eternally I I just can't figure out
whether this is um whether like what
what order things happened in in terms
of is the Bible just a consequence of
people trying to figure out our
evolutionary motivations and turn them
into these stories that guide us why
just okay we can remove the word just
well but that's an important removal
it's an important removal because it's
you know because it's it has bound is
the Bible in part the story of human
beings coming to Consciousness yes yeah
yes okay yeah does it reflect a deeper
underlying reality yes yeah how deep is
that underlying well let's say okay it's
a story about the
psyche and then that say well no it's a
story about the psyche in Society okay
so well no it's a story about the psyche
in society in the natural world mhm okay
well what's underneath that the source
of nature society and the psyche this is
an an interesting question it's very
direct one but I would love just an
answer that I because I haven't got
Clarity on this what is it you believe
what what God is it that you believe in
I've I heard you talk about this sort of
substrate idea and such but in a simple
way that I can understand do you believe
in man in the sky God do you believe in
it's a well that's not as that's not as
primitive a conceptualization as the
atheists would have you believe what is
it you believe well there isn't anything
more complex in the known universe than
a human brain MH so if you want a model
for reality as such like proclaiming
that it has something akin to the
structure of the human psyche is not an
absurd claim given that that is the most
complex Thing by far that we know of by
far so what is it you
believe well I've been explaining it but
I mean I I did say I mentioned something
which we skipped over very quickly
because I introduced it too
rapidly the postmodernists figured out
that we live in a story but then they Le
to a faulty conclusion of two forms well
three there's no uniting story that was
one of their conclusions in fact the
definition of postmodernism is
skepticism of meta narratives there's no
uniting story it's like well that's a
stupid Theory because it there's no
Union so what there's just diversity
well we worship diversity now in this
utterly foolish manner there's no
difference between diversity and
War without a uniting narrative there's
nothing but War so no that's not going
to work wrong
hedonistic self-gratification there's
Michelle Fuko for you to a T it's like
why is that wrong why can't people just
do what they want with whoever they want
all the time because it defeats itself
and quickly it's not a sustainable game
if it's all about you and your whims I
don't want to be anywhere near you and
that won't be so good for you that's not
going to work
power that's really where the
postmodernists landed with their what
would you say temptation to turn towards
marks it's all about power it's like
first of all that's probably a
confession if that's what you believe
and second no it's not try tyrannizing
your wife and see how well that works
for you try tyrannizing yourself and see
how successful you are power is not the
game okay what's the game what's the
story I mentioned earlier it's voluntary
self-sacrifice right you offer yourself
up in the service of something higher
That's the basis of society That's the
basis of psychological stability the
Christian insistence is that That's the
basis of the world I'm gonna ask you
again because I I want to be I want to
be clear is what what is what is it you
what is the god you believe in I think
that the claim that Christ is the
embodiment of the prophet and the laws I
think that's true okay
yeah that that's complicated it's very
very complicated but I think it's true
so you believe that Jesus was God God
yeah I I think I think if you understand
what that means that it's
indisputable I I'll give you I'll give
you a brief explanation of why
Christ takes the sins of the world onto
himself so that means all the problems
that there are are his
problems right okay
so the the idea there is that there's no
difference between making that
assumption and then actually beginning
to address those problems and there's no
difference between that which best
addresses the problems of
mankind that and the Divine those are
the same thing and I can't see how that
can be otherwise because the contrary
hypothesis would be that you would adapt
best to your life by avoiding things
that are difficult and terrifying and No
One Believes that and so the pattern of
the passion this is the voluntary
self-sacrifice issue taken to its
extreme the pattern of the passion is
the decision to voluntarily confront and
welcome anything that happens to
you no matter what it is
and that's a terrible thing to ask or
Endeavor
to undertake
but well the alternative is to shrink
away well the spirit of shrinking away
is the Divine it's like I don't think so
that that's
preposterous the spirit of unlimited
courage well that's not a bad start for
a definition of what constitutes the
Divine the highest possible
value has your belief in God religion
been shaken at all oh
yes
definitely because you've been
constantly over the last year and a half
two years you've been through a
particularly difficult time with losing
people in your life that are um were
foundational to you Tammy as well oh
yeah well and I was in extreme pain for
three
years right I went through three years
where every minute of my life was worse
than any minute I had ever had previous
to that it was
terrible and did I lose
faith was it questioned challenged
absolutely
absolutely um it it just became
absurd it was absurd so many things had
gone off the rails in my wife was dying
my daughter was ill I
was things had blown up around me in 50
different ways and I was like seriously
in pain was terrible I was walking like
12 miles a day because I couldn't sit I
did that for
months winter rain whenever I had a
friend who walked with me was terrible
and yeah I mean I thought what was the
desperation it wasn't even the pain it
was the fact that I was in such terrible
shape that I felt that I was a felt I
believed that I was a burden to everyone
around me and that that was only likely
to get get
worse and I thought what's the sense in
this what's the possible significance of
this so yes everyone's faith is
challenged I mean Christ
himself cries in despair out to God on
the cross and the story wouldn't be
believable without
that like if you're going to live you're
going to be pushed past your
limit right if you're going to
live so
so but who knows what you discover when
you're pushed past your limit in that
moment you know I've been in my
relationship for some time now and I
genuinely think I'd
rather I'd rather die myself than my
partner die
uhuh and you were there as Tammy was
struggling with her health yeah which is
not something I've heard you actually
talk about before in what I've observed
she was she was dying
is that harder to take for you than your
own pain and struggle I think generally
if you love someone it's worse to see
them suffer than to suffer yourself you
certainly figure that out when you have
kids and this all happens at the same
moment the same couple of years of your
life is there anything to you know
people always search for Silver Linings
and
things is there anything we're both
alive my family is thriving the my
adventure is
expanding life isn't fair is it doesn't
appear to be very fair because I mean
this is how your story ended it in that
regard but it could I don't know if an
adventure is
fair I don't even know if that's what we
want like this is something I really
came to understand more deeply when
writing this book what are we built
for we're built for maximal
Challenge and that isn't the way we view
ourselves in the modern world we we view
ourselves as built for pleasure you know
pornography we we view ourselves as
built for
consumption or for safety or
for or for for maybe for egotistical
self-aggrandisement and
fame those
are look many all of those things are
better than their absence let's say you
know I think part of the reason that
Andrew Tate is so popular among young
men because it it's better to be a
successful reprobate than a useless
scer seriously I mean seriously well
that's why the villain in stories is
often admirable compared to the coward
right at least the villain is out there
like doing villain things you know but
at least he has meaning well and he he's
not he's not the villain at least the
villain villain has meaning the the
villain's on a quest of sorts you know a
committed and a committed villain can
learn that's another thing
too what are we built
for I think we're built for maximal
Challenge and that's that's way more
interesting I mean one of the things
that see I figured out that
lies that totalitarian states were a
consequence of lies in about 1985
I I really figured it out I'd been
reading Sol nits and and Carl Yung i'
been reading I was reading a lot I was
really obsessed by it I thought oh I see
so hell is the Dominion of the
LIE okay so what do you do about that
while you stop
lying that's how you fight it and that
means you do that in your own life you
just stop just you practice stopping you
practice not doing the things you know
you shouldn't do you practice
paying attention to your words to see if
they're landing solidly and they make
you confident instead of weak right you
abandon
your
shortterm desire for control and power
understanding that there isn't anything
better that can happen to you than what
happens if you tell the truth right no
matter what it looks like to you in the
moment it's a strange thing but I can't
see how it could be otherwise because
you'd have to hypothesize that you're
going to align yourself with life with
nature with Society with god with
yourself by lying No One Believes that
you might think you can get away with it
that's way different right but no one
believes that
so well so then what happens in
consequence of that well I think what
happens in consequence of that is what
happened to
Abraham your life just goes like
this just opens and opens and opens and
opens and I don't think there's any
limit to
that and that's
ridiculously
entertaining like unbearably
entertaining there's what you want in
your life you want it to be unbearably
entertaining and it's funny you know
when you watch people go to movies I
mean James
Bond right that's an unbearably
entertaining life and that's what people
want to see when they go to a theater
because that's what they want that's
what they
want and maybe all the sorrow and
catastrophe that's part of that has to
be part of it because otherwise
there's there's nothing about it that's
glorious why does that move you so much
because life is very
wide you know
there's the the Peaks and bellies
are very distant from one
another and I I don't know maybe as you
ascend uphill
your understanding of
the chasm between the Peaks and valys
also
increases you know cuz you think maybe
as you're successful you're happier well
first of all I'm not sure that success
and happiness are the same thing I'm not
sure that we want them to be the same
thing I don't even know what people mean
when they say they want to be happy if
you investigate it technically you find
out that really what people mean when
they say they want to be happy is that
they don't want to
suffer that's different than the
enthusiastic joy that you might think
about you know that's part and parsel of
a child's laughter you want to be happy
what do you want to be laugh laughing
all the time is that what you're saying
well no that's not what I mean well what
do you mean do you mean the
gratification that comes along with the
cookie at 1: in the morning no that's
not what I mean well okay what do you
mean well I don't know it's like yeah
you don't know partly what you mean is
you don't want pointless suffering fair
enough you know fair fair enough but
that doesn't mean it's happiness that's
your goal there's no I don't think
that's your goal I don't think your
podcast would be successful if that was
your goal I think you would have washed
up on the shs of triviality long ago I
do well there's something you're doing
that's working there's something about
the way you're approaching the situation
that's of broad appeal there's some
archetypal pattern that's you're acting
out in your conduct in your podcast
because otherwise it wouldn't have the
effect it
has it's true I I I agree I don't know
what it is but I but well you know some
of it we talked about some of it you
know you said that you you can you
can you can apprehend the outline of
some of the principles some of that you
probably discovered as you went along
rather than you know putting them in
place to begin with this seems to work
yeah you know so that's a discovery of
of a pathway well as a podcaster as well
I don't think you really truly
understand your principles until they're
tested so and especially when they're
tested from both sides so th you know
this side's telling you to be more like
this and this side's screaming at you to
be more like this and you you're faced
with a decision when you're you know
when I started out as a podcaster there
was no one screaming there was no one
there right right but at some point in
the journey you get immense pressure
yeah yeah well then you're also that
forces a decision out of you yeah well
you're also in a situation then when you
have to start worrying about your
reputation which is something you don't
have to worry about when no one knows
who you are yeah and it's very dangerous
to worry about your reputation as soon
as you start worrying about your
reputation as a part you're going to
fail yeah cuz you're not interesting
then you'll stop taking risks yeah so
then you know another question emerges
you got people yelling at you from this
side and this side well how do you know
what's right well it
isn't partly it's by listening because
you want to pay attention to your
audience but there's something guiding
you if you do what you're doing properly
that has nothing to do with the clamor
yeah yeah it's funny because actually it
links back to some of the other
principles we talked about today it's
one of one of the things I've learned is
having a good relationship like good
friendships and a good part relationship
with my wife is actually the foundation
for me to be able to navigate the scream
people screaming at me from both sides
yeah why because it just anchors me
in it's like an anchor of like knowing
who I actually am irrespective of the
the like the crowd telling you who you
are yeah yeah well that's a good that's
a very good illustration of distributed
identity yeah yeah yeah it's like you
are your wife and your friends and your
family yeah right there's no
fundamentally there's there cannot be
any separation there that's yeah and and
well you you said you've you experienced
that it's like that's what gives you
that's part of what gives you a
foundation it's like yeah that's not a
losery and it's nice because as you said
like when I go out into the world
everyone is very nice to me it's just if
you spend too long on the internet
people scream at you from both sides
they say do it more like this do it like
this where are the CEOs this is called D
we want more of these kind of guess you
should talk about this politics Trump
Cala Trump and the middle of that you
going [__] hell and that's where you
have to take some time to really like
tune into yourself and go who am I and
why am I doing this and what are my
principles and irrespective of the
principles I Choose Or I believe in that
there's going to be suffering and
there's going to be sacrifice and
there's going to be great Advent as well
MH and the good one thing I really like
that helps me for some bizarre reason is
the knowledge that I will die
someday why does that help it just it's
a good question why does it help it
helps
because if I think it's focusing in me
on what actually matters yeah in a way
that I wouldn't be it wouldn't be as
easy to otherwise what it saying is it's
just a reminder of okay if I'm going to
die someday then actually this person's
screaming at me to be more like
this is obviously doesn't matter like it
obviously doesn't matter in the in the
context of my other priorities well it
might be that death is what makes things
matter scarcity always makes the value
something well right but but then we're
talking about a kind of ultimate
scarcity and like you can ask yourself
one of the fundamental questions you can
ask yourself is what is the nature of
the real right and I think death makes
things real I agree yeah that's why it's
an important I don't know seems like a
weird thing to say but it reminds me
that what's trivial and what's
not um in the context of a finite amount
of resources time attention that I can
commit it's it's foolish to commit some
of them to some of the things that I
find myself committing them to sometimes
when I remind myself of that death how
do you pick your guests curiosity yeah
that's I pick people I want to talk to
yeah it's like I'd like to hear what
that person has to say yeah and it's
something that I'm trying to alert so
it's typically when I when I'd seen you
wrote a book called who we who wrestle
with God that's the word Israel hey
that's what Israel means uhhuh yeah yeah
and that's the chosen people of God
Israel I didn't know that yeah but I
thought this is a subject that I'm
curious about so I would like to talk to
Jordan to see if he can help me you know
fill in this sort of jigsaw puzzle in my
brain of subject matters that relate to
this and I evolve I'm probably going to
have kids soon and when I have my kids
I'm going to be curious about Parenthood
and I'm going to speak to you know
guests that can help me with that that's
been my framework and it's worked in
terms of I still like doing this well
there's no reason so when I'm on stage
lecturing I'm on a
journey it's a real journey yeah it's
not an act like I pose a question to
myself before I go on stage it's a
question I want the answer to and I
don't have and I go on stage and I try
to move towards the answer and people
come along and I want to go there and
they want to come along it's a good deal
and the podcasts are like that if you're
doing them honestly it's like I want to
talk to this person that's a really nice
way of thinking about it moving towards
an answer yeah not even sure what the
answer is but well and it'll change as
you approach it move towards the answer
right the questions and the answers
change as you move towards it that's
okay that's fine we touched on this
earlier but it's something that I wanted
to touch on because one of the themes of
this podcast is often the subject of
grief and I read that you lost both your
parents within sort of six months of
each
other what do what does that moment
teach you about priorities about life
about what matters about anything that
you could pass down to me that's
important things last way less Long than
you
think so you should be aware of that and
not take things for
granted no and so and I don't think I
took my parents for granted now did I do
that perfectly well we don't do things
perfectly
but it was pretty good it was pretty
good I learned when my I watched my
wife's family go through the death of
their mother and one of the consequences
of that was
that my wife and her siblings and her
father pulled closer together in during
that time and that really it was like a
wound healing you know mhm and so I saw
that and I saw that that worked so for
example
Tammy has a stronger relationship with
her older brother than she did
before her father also died so we lost
her father and my father and my mother
this year
basically it isn't that her brother
substituted for her father but it was
that there was more there than she had
made use of and so when her father
father
Departed the possibility of expanding
that relationship with her brother was
on the table and I did the same thing
with my sister and my
brother
and that's helpful it's
helpful
so there's opportunity everywhere even
in grief there's
opportunity is that one lesson that your
father taught you that stay pay
attention
he was good at that he was good at he
taught that very well and it wasn't a
good idea to not pay attention on my
father he uh he had a he wasn't he
wasn't I wouldn't describe him as an
easy
person he had high standards and he was
rather
unforgiving and
that's I don't know do you forgive the
people that you love for not being
everything they they could be that's a
hard question it's okay dear it's like
is it
now I think we have a lot of that in our
culture it's okay I like you just like
you
are do you forgive
him yeah yes I don't think
they're my dad and I sorted out our
differences a long time ago you know
when I left home
our relationship was somewhat fractious
from the time I was 13 till the time I
left
home he developed quite a severe
depression which ran in my family and
that made
him harder to understand than had been
the case previously it also made the
probability that if there
were events in the household that they
would be they'd have
more reverberation than they would have
otherwise and that was confusing to
me I understood why that happened later
not much later and it wasn't very long
after I left home that whatever
differences I had with my father were
irrelevant so we didn't really
have unresolved issues I wouldn't say
what about your mother what's the one
lesson my mom was great what's the
lesson if any she left with you my
mother was a very hospitable
person and in the in the Old Testament
accounts hospitality is a cardinal
virtue and she was very good at making
people welcome when my the day my mother
died I I I I thought about her most of
the day that day memories came to mind
and one of the things I realized about
my mother was that uh I don't have a
single negative memory of my
mother it's really quite something to
know someone for 62
years and really I really don't have a
negative memory of my mother I don't
remember
any time where she
acted she was a good person my
mother um
I could always make her laugh she had a
very good sense of humor I appreciated
that a
lot and she although she was a very
agreeable person and a very feminine
person she was tough too and she wasn't
a edle
type you know she had strong protective
instincts but her desire to help her
children become independent Trump that
for sure
Jordan we have a closing tradition on
this podcast where the last guest leaves
a question for the next not knowing who
they're leaving it for and the question
left for you is how do you feel most
misunderstood I don't know if I am
misunderstood I think the people who
don't like me some of them have me
confused with some figment of their
imagination some of the people who don't
like me they understand
me they just don't like what they
understand they don't like what it
implies and so that's okay with
me I I don't feel misunderstood I
wouldn't say I I've got nothing to
complain
about
um people who've been listening to me
they understand me and as far as I can
tell that's been very good for them and
that's unbelievably gratifying for me
it's you must experience that I mean
your podcast has had a broad effect and
I presume a positive effect on people
there isn't anything better than that to
see that what you're doing has that
broadly salutary effect that's great
that's another indication of our
essentially I would say religious nature
you know Jo willing told me this you
know Joo said that he could he could
have easily been like a gang leader
criminal type he's a tough Warrior
character you know and he said when he
went into the military he discovered
that being the leader of a team and
moving people in a positive direction
there wasn't anything better than that
and so that just straightened him out
you know and I feel exactly the same way
there isn't anything better than that
and so I'm able to do that and I see the
evidence of that all the time and
whatever misunderstandings there might
be about me necessary or unnecessary are
so trivial compared to that that they're
not they don't even really register what
a privilege Jord that's for sure Jordan
thank you so much it's a privilege we
share because doing this for me is a
great privilege and the fact that it
positively impacts anyone is everything
you've just said and I see that in your
work but also I see it when we have
these conversations in the immense
Avalanche of people who profess that
you've changed their life in some
positive way and moved them in a better
Direction and that's a refutable and no
one can you know I mean there's as I say
there's no greater privilege so Jordan
thank you so much for your time I
appreciate it thank you thanks for the
invitation again it's always a pleasure
talking to you thank you isn't this cool
every single conversation I have here on
the D of a CE at the very end of it
you'll know I asked the guest to leave a
question in the Diary of a CEO and what
we've done is we've turned every single
question written in the Diary of a CEO
into these conversation cards that you
can play at home so you've got every
guest we've ever had their question and
on the back of it if you scan that QR
code you get to watch the person who
answered that question we're finally
revealing all of the questions and the
people that answered the question the
brand new version 2 updated conversation
cards are out right now at Theon
conversation cards.com they've sold out
twice instantaneously so if you are
interested getting hold of some limited
edition conversation cards I really
really recommend acting quickly
[Music]